---
title: butterfly
category: insects
customer: The Zoo
project: Earth
starred: true
type: two
---

Butterflies are insects in the macrolepidopteran clade Rhopalocera from the
order Lepidoptera, which also includes moths. Adult butterflies have large,
often brightly coloured wings, and conspicuous, fluttering flight. The group
comprises the large superfamily Papilionoidea, which contains at least one
former group, the skippers (formerly the superfamily "Hesperioidea"), and the
most recent analyses suggest it also contains the moth-butterflies (formerly
the superfamily "Hedyloidea"). Butterfly fossils date to the Paleocene, which
was about 56 million years ago.

The Oxford English Dictionary derives the word straightforwardly from Old
English butorflēoge, butter-fly; similar names in Old Dutch and Old High German
show that the name is ancient. A possible source of the name is the bright
yellow male of the brimstone (Gonepteryx rhamni); another is that butterflies
were on the wing in meadows during the spring and summer butter season while
the grass was growing.

The earliest Lepidoptera fossils are of a small moth, Archaeolepis mane, of
Jurassic age, around 190 million years ago (mya).

Traditionally, butterflies have been divided into the superfamily Papilionoidea
excluding the smaller groups of the Hesperiidae (skippers) and the more
moth-like Hedylidae of America. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that the
traditional Papilionoidea is paraphyletic with respect to the other two groups,
so they should both be included within Papilionoidea, to form a single
butterfly group, thereby synonymous with the clade Rhopalocera.

Butterfly adults are characterized by their four scale-covered wings, which
give the Lepidoptera their name (Ancient Greek λεπίς lepís, scale + πτερόν
pterón, wing). These scales give butterfly wings their colour: they are
pigmented with melanins that give them blacks and browns, as well as uric acid
derivatives and flavones that give them yellows, but many of the blues, greens,
reds and iridescent colours are created by structural coloration produced by
the micro-structures of the scales and hairs.
